+++
draft = false
weight = 23612
title = 'ЧЧ Антйа 9.122'
description = '“ ‘I made Rāmānanda Rāya the governor of Rajahmundry. There is practically no account of whatever money he took and distributed in that position.'
summary = '“ ‘I made Rāmānanda Rāya the governor of Rajahmundry. There is practically no account of whatever money he took and distributed in that position.'
+++

_rājamahindāra ‘rājā’ kainu rāma-rāya  
ye khāila, yebā dila, nāhi lekhā-dāya_

## Пословный перевод

_rājamahindāra_ — of the place known as Rajahmundry; _rājā_ — governor; _kainu_ — I made; _rāma_\-_rāya_ — Rāmānanda Rāya; _ye_ _khāila_ — whatever money he took; _yebā_ — whatever; _dila_ — distributed; _nāhi_ _lekhā_\-_dāya_ — there is no account.

## Перевод

**“ ‘I made Rāmānanda Rāya the governor of Rajahmundry. There is practically no account of whatever money he took and distributed in that position.**

## Комментарий

Near Rajahmundry is a famous railway station. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī notes that the present Rajahmundry City is located on the northern bank of the Godāvarī. At the time when Rāmānanda Rāya was governor, however, the state capital, which was known as Vidyānagara or Vidyāpura, was located on the southern side of the Godāvarī, at the confluence of the Godāvarī and the sea. That was the part of the country which at that time was known as Rajahmundry. North of Kaliṅga-deśa is Utkaliṅga, or the state of Orissa. The capital of southern Orissa was known as Rajahmundry, but now the location of Rajahmundry has changed.
