+++
draft = false
weight = 15141
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 12.18'
description = 'Kṛṣṇa Miśra was a son of Advaita Ācārya. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu always sat in his heart.'
summary = 'Kṛṣṇa Miśra was a son of Advaita Ācārya. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu always sat in his heart.'
+++

_kṛṣṇa-miśra-nāma āra ācārya-tanaya  
caitanya-gosāñi baise yāṅhāra hṛdaya_

## Пословный перевод

_kṛṣṇa_\-_miśra_ — Kṛṣṇa Miśra; _nāma_ — of the name; _āra_ — and; _ācārya_\-_tanaya_ — the son of Advaita Ācārya; _caitanya_\-_gosāñi_ — Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; _baise_ — sits; _yāṅhāra_ — in whose; _hṛdaya_ — heart.

## Перевод

**Kṛṣṇa Miśra was a son of Advaita Ācārya. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu always sat in his heart.**

## Комментарий

Of the six sons of Advaita Ācārya, three, Acyutānanda, Kṛṣṇa Miśra and Gopāla dāsa, lived faithfully in the service of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Since Acyutānanda did not accept a wife, he had no issue. The second son of Advaita Ācārya, Kṛṣṇa Miśra, had two sons, Raghunātha Cakravartī and Dola-govinda. The descendants of Raghunātha still live in Śāntipura, in the neighborhoods of Madana-gopāla-pāḍa, Gaṇakara, Mṛjāpura and Kumārakhāli. Dola-govinda had three sons, namely Cāṅda, Kandarpa and Gopīnātha. The descendants of Kandarpa live in Maldah, in the village Jikābāḍī. Gopīnātha had three sons, Śrīvallabha, Prāṇavallabha and Keśava. The descendants of Śrīvallabha live in the villages known as Maśiyāḍārā (Mahiṣaḍerā), Dāmukadiyā and Caṇḍīpura. There is a genealogical table for the family of Śrīvallabha beginning from his eldest son, Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa. The descendants of Śrīvallabha’s youngest son, Rāmagopāla, still live in Dāmukadiyā, Caṇḍīpura, Śolamāri, and so on. The descendants of Prāṇavallabha and Keśava live in Uthalī. The son of Prāṇavallabha was Ratneśvara, and his son was Kṛṣṇarāma, whose youngest son was Lakṣmī-nārāyaṇa. His son was Navakiśora, and Navakiśora’s second son was Rāmamohana, whose eldest son was Jagabandhu and whose third son, Vīracandra, accepted the _sannyāsa_ order and established a Deity of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Katwa. These two sons of Rāmamohana were known as Baḍa Prabhu and Choṭa Prabhu, and they inaugurated the circumambulation of Navadvīpa-dhāma. One may refer to the _Vaiṣṇava-mañjuṣā_ for the complete genealogical table of Advaita Prabhu in the line of Kṛṣṇa Miśra.
