+++
draft = false
weight = 15452
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 15.14'
description = '“My dear mother and father,” the Lord said, “it is very good that Viśvarūpa has accepted the sannyāsa order, for thus He has delivered both His father’s family and His mother’s family.”'
summary = '“My dear mother and father,” the Lord said, “it is very good that Viśvarūpa has accepted the sannyāsa order, for thus He has delivered both His father’s family and His mother’s family.”'
+++

_bhāla haila, — viśvarūpa sannyāsa karila  
pitṛ-kula, mātṛ-kula, — dui uddhārila_

## Пословный перевод

_bhāla_ _haila_ — it is very good; _viśvarūpa_ — Viśvarūpa; _sannyāsa_ — the renounced order of life; _karila_ — has accepted; _pitṛ_\-_kula_ — father’s family; _mātṛ_\-_kula_ — mother’s family; _dui_ — both of them; _uddhārila_ — delivered.

## Перевод

**“My dear mother and father,” the Lord said, “it is very good that Viśvarūpa has accepted the sannyāsa order, for thus He has delivered both His father’s family and His mother’s family.”**

## Комментарий

It is sometimes said that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu disapproved of the acceptance of the _sannyāsa_ order in this Kali-yuga because in the _śāstra_ it is said:

_aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ_ _sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam  
devareṇa sutotpattiṁ_ _kalau pañca vivarjayet_

“In this Age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of _sannyāsa,_ the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man’s begetting children in his brother’s wife.” (_Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa, Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa_ 185.180)

Nevertheless, we see that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself accepted _sannyāsa_ and approved of the _sannyāsa_ of His elder brother, Viśvarūpa. It is clearly said here, _bhāla haila, — viśvarūpa sannyāsa karila/ pitṛ-kula, mātṛ-kula, — dui uddhārila._ Therefore, should it be thought that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu made statements that are contradictory? No, actually He did not. It is recommended that one accept _sannyāsa_ to dedicate his life for the service of the Lord, and everyone must take that kind of _sannyāsa,_ for by accepting such _sannyāsa_ one renders the best service to both his paternal and maternal families. But one should not accept the _sannyāsa_ order of the Māyāvāda school, which has practically no meaning. We find many Māyāvādī _sannyāsīs_ simply loitering in the street thinking themselves Brahman or Nārāyaṇa and spending all day and night begging so they can fill their hungry bellies. Māyāvādī _sannyāsīs_ have become so degraded that there is a section of them who eat everything, just like hogs and dogs. It is such degraded _sannyāsa_ that is prohibited in this age. Actually, Śrīla Śaṅkarācārya’s principles for the acceptance of _sannyāsa_ were very strict, but later the so-called Māyāvādī _sannyāsīs_ became degraded because of their false philosophy, which propounds that by accepting _sannyāsa_ one becomes Nārāyaṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu rejected that kind of _sannyāsa._ But the acceptance of _sannyāsa_ is one of the items of the _varṇāśrama-dharma._ How then can it be rejected?
