+++
draft = false
weight = 15683
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 17.103'
description = 'On another day an astrologer came who was said to know everything — past, present and future. Thus Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu received him with all honor and put this question before him.'
summary = 'On another day an astrologer came who was said to know everything — past, present and future. Thus Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu received him with all honor and put this question before him.'
+++

_āra dine jyotiṣa sarva-jña eka āila  
tāhāre sammāna kari’ prabhu praśna kaila_

## Пословный перевод

_āra_ _dine_ — some other day; _jyotiṣa_ — an astrologer; _sarva_\-_jña_ — who knows everything; _eka_ — one; _āila_ — came there; _tāhāre_ — unto him; _sammāna_ _kari’_ — giving all honor; _prabhu_ — the Lord; _praśna_ — question; _kaila_ — put.

## Перевод

**On another day an astrologer came who was said to know everything — past, present and future. Thus Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu received him with all honor and put this question before him.**

## Комментарий

_Brāhmaṇas_ generally used to become astrologers, Āyur-vedic physicians, teachers and priests. Although highly learned and respectable, such _brāhmaṇas_ went from door to door to distribute their knowledge. A _brāhmaṇa_ would first go to a householder’s home to give information about the functions to be performed on a particular _tithi,_ or date, but if there were sickness in the family, the family members would consult the _brāhmaṇa_ as a physician, and the _brāhmaṇa_ would give instruction and some medicine. Often, since the _brāhmaṇas_ were expert in astrology, people would also be greatly inquisitive about their past, present and future.

Although the _brāhmaṇa_ appeared at Lord Caitanya’s house as a beggar, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu received him with great respect because he was a qualified _brāhmaṇa_ who knew the astrological science perfectly. Although _brāhmaṇas_ would go door to door just like beggars, they were honored as very respectable guests. This was the system in Hindu society five hundred years ago, during the time of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This system was current even one hundred years ago; even fifty or sixty years ago, when we were children, such _brāhmaṇas_ would visit householders like humble beggars, and people would derive great benefit from the mercy of such _brāhmaṇas._ The greatest benefit was that a householder could save a great deal of money from being spent on doctor bills because the _brāhmaṇas,_ aside from explaining the past, present and future, could ordinarily cure all kinds of diseases simply by giving instructions and some medicine. Thus no one was bereft of the benefit of a first-class physician, astrologer and priest. The important members of ISKCON should give careful attention to our Dallas school, where children are being taught Sanskrit and English to become perfect _brāhmaṇas._ If they are actually trained as perfect _brāhmaṇas,_ they can save society from rogues and ruffians; indeed, people can live happily under the protection of qualified _brāhmaṇas._ Therefore the _Bhagavad-gītā_ (4.13) gives special stress to the division of society (_cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karmavibhāgaśaḥ_)_._ Unfortunately some people are now claiming to be _brāhmaṇas_ simply by birthright, with no qualifications. Therefore the entire society is in chaos.
