+++
draft = false
weight = 15721
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 17.141'
description = 'The loud sound of the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra certainly made the Kazi very much afraid, and he hid himself within his room. Hearing the people thus protesting, murmuring in great anger, the Kazi would not come out of his home.'
summary = 'The loud sound of the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra certainly made the Kazi very much afraid, and he hid himself within his room. Hearing the people thus protesting, murmuring in great anger, the Kazi would not come out of his home.'
+++

_kīrtanera dhvanite kājī lukāila ghare  
tarjana garjana śuni’ nā haya bāhire_

## Пословный перевод

_kīrtanera_ — of the _saṅkīrtana_ movement; _dhvanite_ — by the sound; _kājī_ — the Chand Kazi; _lukāila_ — hid himself; _ghare_ — in the room; _tarjana_ — murmuring; _garjana_ — protesting; _śuni’_ — hearing; _nā_ — does not; _haya_ — come out; _bāhire_ — outside.

## Перевод

**The loud sound of the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra certainly made the Kazi very much afraid, and he hid himself within his room. Hearing the people thus protesting, murmuring in great anger, the Kazi would not come out of his home.**

## Комментарий

The Kazi’s order not to perform _saṅkīrtana_ could stand only as long as there was no civil disobedience. Under the leadership of the Supreme Lord, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the chanters, increasing in number, disobeyed the order of the Kazi. Thousands assembled together and formed parties, chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa _mahā-mantra_ and making a tumultuous sound of protest. Thus the Kazi was very much afraid, as naturally one should be under such circumstances.

In the present day also, people all over the world may join together in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and protest against the present degraded governments of the world’s godless societies, which are based on all kinds of sinful activities. _Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam_ states that in the Age of Kali, thieves, rogues and fourth-class people who have neither education nor culture capture the seats of governments to exploit the citizens. This is a symptom of Kali-yuga that has already appeared. People cannot feel secure about their lives and property, yet the so-called governments continue, and government ministers get fat salaries, although they are unable to do anything good for society. The only remedy for such conditions is to enhance the _saṅkīrtana_ movement under the banner of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and protest against the sinful activities of all the world’s governments.

The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a sentimental religious movement; it is a movement for the reformation of all the anomalies of human society. If people take to it seriously, discharging this duty scientifically, as ordered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the world will see peace and prosperity instead of being confused and hopeless under useless governments. There are always rogues and thieves in human society, and as soon as a weak government is unable to execute its duties, these rogues and thieves come out to do their business. Thus the entire society becomes a hell unfit for gentlemen to live in. There is an immediate need for a good government — a government by the people, with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless the masses of people become Kṛṣṇa conscious, they cannot be good men. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu started by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa _mahā-mantra_ still has its potency. Therefore people should understand it seriously and scientifically and spread it all over the world.

The _saṅkīrtana_ movement started by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is described in the _Caitanya-bhāgavata, Madhya-khaṇḍa,_ twenty-third chapter, beginning with verse 241, which states, “My dear Lord, let my mind be fixed at Your lotus feet.” Following Lord Caitanya’s chanting, all the devotees reproduced the same sound He chanted. In this way the Lord proceeded, leading the entire party on the strand roads by the bank of the Ganges. When the Lord came to His own _ghāṭa,_ or bathing place, He danced more and more. Then He proceeded to Mādhāi’s _ghāṭa._ In this way Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Lord, who was known as Viśvambhara, danced all over the banks of the Ganges. Then He proceeded to Bārakoṇā-ghāṭa, then Nāgariyā-ghāṭa, and, traveling through Gaṅgānagara, reached Simuliyā, a quarter at one end of the town. All these places surround Śrī Māyāpur. After reaching Simuliyā, the Lord proceeded toward the Kazi’s house, and in this way He reached the door of Chand Kazi.
