+++
draft = false
weight = 15574
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 16.102'
description = '“Such mistakes should be considered negligible. One should see only how such poets have displayed their poetic power.'
summary = '“Such mistakes should be considered negligible. One should see only how such poets have displayed their poetic power.'
+++

_doṣa-guṇa-vicāra — ei alpa kari’ māni  
kavitva-karaṇe śakti, tāṅhā se vākhāni_

## Пословный перевод

_doṣa_\-_guṇa_\-_vicāra_ — therefore to criticize one’s poetry as good or bad; _ei_ — this; _alpa_ — negligible; _kari’_ — making; _māni_ — I consider; _kavitva_ — poetic ingenuity; _karaṇe_ — in performing; _śakti_ — power; _tāṅhā_ — that; _se_ — we; _vākhāni_ — describe.

## Перевод

**“Such mistakes should be considered negligible. One should see only how such poets have displayed their poetic power.**

## Комментарий

In _Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam_ (1.5.11) it is said:

_tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo  
_ _yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api  
nāmāny anantasya yaśo ’ṅkitāni yat  
_ _śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ_

“In explaining the glories of the Lord, inexperienced men may compose poetry with many faults, but because it contains glorification of the Lord, great personalities read it, hear it and chant it.” Despite its minute literary discrepancies, one must study poetry on the merit of its subject matter. According to Vaiṣṇava philosophy, any literature that glorifies the Lord, whether properly written or not, is first class. There need be no other considerations. The poetic compositions of Bhavabhūti, or Śrīkaṇṭha, include _Mālatī-mādhava, Uttara-carita, Vīra-carita_ and many similar Sanskrit dramas. This great poet was born during the time of Bhojarāja as the son of Nīlakaṇṭha, a _brāhmaṇa._ Kālidāsa flourished during the time of Mahārāja Vikramāditya, and he became the state poet. He composed some thirty or forty Sanskrit dramas, including _Kumāra-sambhava, Abhijñāna-śakuntalā_ and _Megha-dūta._ His drama _Raghu-vaṁśa_ is especially famous. We have already described Jayadeva in chapter thirteen of the _Ādi-līlā._
