+++
draft = false
weight = 15516
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 16.44'
description = 'The Lord replied, “By the grace of the Lord someone may become a great poet, and similarly by His grace someone else may become a great śruti-dhara who can memorize anything immediately.”'
summary = 'The Lord replied, “By the grace of the Lord someone may become a great poet, and similarly by His grace someone else may become a great śruti-dhara who can memorize anything immediately.”'
+++

_prabhu kahe, devera vare tumi — ‘kavi-vara’  
aiche devera vare keho haya ‘śrutidhara’_

## Пословный перевод

_prabhu_ — the Lord; _kahe_ — replied; _devera_ — of a superior power; _vare_ — by benediction; _tumi_ — you; _kavi_\-_vara_ — the most elevated poet; _aiche_ — similarly; _devera_ — of the Lord; _vare_ — by the benediction; _keho_ — someone; _haya_ — becomes; _śruti_\-_dhara_ — one who can immediately remember.

## Перевод

**The Lord replied, “By the grace of the Lord someone may become a great poet, and similarly by His grace someone else may become a great śruti-dhara who can memorize anything immediately.”**

## Комментарий

In this connection, _śruti-dhara_ is a very important word. _Śruti_ means “hearing,” and _dhara_ means “one who can capture.” Formerly, before the beginning of Kali-yuga, almost everyone, especially among the intelligent men, the _brāhmaṇas,_ was a _śruti-dhara._ As soon as a student heard any of the Vedic wisdom from his master, he would remember it forever. There was no need to refer to books, and therefore there were no written books in those days. The spiritual master delivered the Vedic hymns and their explanations to the student, who would then remember them forever, without consulting books.

To become a _śruti-dhara,_ one who can remember simply by hearing, is a great achievement for a student. In the _Bhagavad-gītā_ (10.41) the Lord says:

_yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ_ _śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā  
tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ_ _mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam_

“Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a spark of My splendor.”

As soon as we find anything extraordinary, we should understand that such an extraordinary manifestation is the special grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied to the champion, Keśava Kāśmīrī, that just as he was greatly proud of being a favorite devotee of mother Sarasvatī, so someone else, like Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself, being favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, could become a _śruti-dhara_ and thus memorize anything immediately simply by hearing it.
