+++
draft = false
weight = 15526
title = 'ЧЧ Ади 16.54'
description = '“My dear sir, in this verse there are five faults and five literary ornaments. I shall state them one after another. Kindly hear Me and then give your judgment.'
summary = '“My dear sir, in this verse there are five faults and five literary ornaments. I shall state them one after another. Kindly hear Me and then give your judgment.'
+++

_pañca doṣa ei śloke pañca alaṅkāra  
krame āmi kahi, śuna, karaha vicāra_

## Пословный перевод

_pañca_ — five; _doṣa_ — faults; _ei_ _śloke_ — in this verse; _pañca_ — five; _alaṅkāra_ — literary embellishments; _krame_ — one after another; _āmi_ — I; _kahi_ — say; _śuna_ — kindly hear; _karaha_ — give; _vicāra_ — judgment.

## Перевод

**“My dear sir, in this verse there are five faults and five literary ornaments. I shall state them one after another. Kindly hear Me and then give your judgment.**

## Комментарий

In the verse beginning with _mahattvaṁ gaṅgāyāḥ_ there are five literary ornaments and five examples of faulty composition. There are two examples of the fault called _avimṛṣṭa-vidheyāṁśa_ and one example each of the faults _viruddha-mati, punar-ukti_ and _bhagna-krama._

_Vimṛṣṭa_ means “clean,” and _vidheyāṁśa_ means “predicate.” It is a general rule of composition to establish a subject first and then give its predicate. For example, according to Sanskrit grammar if one says, “This man is learned,” his composition is in order. But if one says, “Learned is this man,” the composition is not in order. Such a flaw is called _avimṛṣṭa-vidheyāṁśa-doṣa,_ or the fault of unclean composition. The subject matter to be known of the verse is the glorification of the Ganges, and therefore the word _idam_ (“this”), or what is known, should have been placed before instead of after the glorification. The subject matter already known should be placed before the unknown so that its meaning will not be misconstrued.

The second instance of _avimṛṣṭa-vidheyāṁśa-doṣa_ occurs in the words _dvitīya-śrī-lakṣmīr iva._ In this composition the word _dvitīya_ (“second”) is _vidheya,_ or unknown. Placing the unknown first to make the compound word _dvitīya-śrī-lakṣmīr_ is another fault. The words _dvitīya-śrī-lakṣmīr iva_ were intended to compare the Ganges to the goddess of fortune, but because of this fault the meaning of the compound word was bewildering.

The third fault is that of _viruddha-mati,_ or contradictory conception, in the words _bhavānī-bhartuḥ._ The word _bhavānī_ refers to the wife of Bhava, Lord Śiva. But since Bhavānī is already known as the wife of Lord Śiva, to add the word _bhartā,_ “husband,” thus forming a compound meaning “the husband of the wife of Lord Śiva,” is contradictory, for thus it appears as if the wife of Lord Śiva had another husband.

The fourth fault is _punar-ukti,_ or redundancy, which occurs when the verb _vibhavati_ (“flourishes”), which should have ended the composition, is further qualified by the unnecessary adjective _adbhuta-guṇā_ (“endowed with wonderful qualities”). The fifth fault is _bhagna-krama,_ which means “broken order.” In the first, third and fourth lines there is _anuprāsa,_ or alliteration, created by the sounds _ta, ra_ and _bha,_ but in the second line there is no such _anuprāsa,_ and therefore the order is broken.
